h1. CamelCase

New words created by smashing together capitalized words.

CamelCase is the original wiki convention for creating hyperlinks, with the additional requirement that the capitals are followed by a lower-case letter; hence “AlabamA” and “ABc” will not be links.

h2. Customizing the Wiki behavior

Some people dislike linking by CamelCase.  While Trac remains faithful to the original Wiki style, it provides a number of ways to accomodate users with different preferences:
 * There's an option (`ignore_missing_pages` in the "Not found: text("[wiki) link(TracIni#wiki-section)":wiki/TracIni#wiki-section"] section of TracIni) to simply ignore links to missing pages when the link is written using the CamelCase style, instead of that word being replaced by a gray link followed by a question mark.[[BR]]
   That can be useful when CamelCase style is used to name code artifacts like class names and there's no corresponding page for them.
 * There's an option (`split_page_names` in the  "Not found: text("[wiki) link(TracIni#wiki-section)":wiki/TracIni#wiki-section"] section of TracIni) to automatically insert space characters between the words of a CamelCase link when rendering the link.
 * Creation of explicit Wiki links is also easy, see WikiPageNames for details.
 * In addition, Wiki formatting can be disabled completely in some places (e.g. when rendering commit log messages). See `wiki_format_messages` in the "Not found: text("[changeset) link(TracIni#changeset-section)":wiki/TracIni#changeset-section"] section of TracIni.

See TracIni for more information on the available options.

h2. More information on CamelCase

 * "http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WikiCase":http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WikiCase
 * "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase

----
See also: WikiPageNames, WikiNewPage, WikiFormatting, TracWiki
