The preferred method for using OpenSC on Unix is to use the pre-packaged versions from operating system vendor or distribution (see [[Linux Distributions]], for example). If the version is older than the current version, first try to convince the vendor to upgrade the packaged version, if that's not a possibility, OpenSC can be easily built from source on any modern Unix.

h2. Typical Installation

We suggest to install OpenSC into @/usr@ and to put the configuration file into @/etc/opensc@. The default however would be @/usr/local@ and @/usr/local/etc@, so you might want to change those. We suggest to configure and compile OpenSC like this:

bc..
tar xfvz opensc-*.tar.gz
cd opensc-*
./bootstrap
./configure --prefix=/usr --sysconfdir=/etc/opensc
make
sudo make install

h2. Build Requirements

* "PCSC-Lite":https://pcsclite.apdu.fr/ (runtime and development)
* "OpenSSL":https://www.openssl.org/ (optional, runtime and development)
* "OpenPACE":https://frankmorgner.github.io/openpace/ (optional, runtime and development)
* "GNU Readline":https://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html (optional, runtime and development)

h4. Installing Requirements on Debian/Ubuntu

bc. sudo apt-get install pcscd libccid libpcsclite-dev libssl-dev libreadline-dev autoconf automake build-essential docbook-xsl xsltproc libtool pkg-config


If the certificates in the card are compressed, you also need zlib:

bc. sudo apt-get install zlib1g-dev


If the driver for the card needs openpace:

bc. sudo apt-get install openpace libaec-dev


h4. Installing Requirements on Fedora

bc. sudo dnf install readline-devel openssl-devel libxslt docbook-style-xsl pcsc-lite-devel automake autoconf libtool gcc

If the certificates in the card are compressed, you also need zlib:

bc. sudo dnf install zlib-devel


h2. Build Configuration

OpenSC tries to auto-detect all libraries using the "pkg-config":https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/ system.

If you don't have @pkg-config@ installed, and don't want to install it, you can use environment variables to tell configure, how to link with some library:

* @PCSC_CFLAGS@ and @PCSC_LIBS@ for PCSC-Lite
* @OPENSSL_CFLAGS@ and @OPENSSL_LIBS@ for OpenSSL
* @OPENPACE_CFLAGS@ and @OPENPACE_LIBS@ for OpenPACE
* @READLINE_CFLAGS@ and @READLINE_LIBS@ for GNU Readline

@./configure --help@ will list other useful environment variables.

If some libraries are not installed in typical locations, you need to tell @pkg-config@ where to find the @*.pc@ files. You can do this with the @PKG_CONFIG_PATH@ environment variable, for example:

bc. export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=/usr/lib/pkgconfig:/usr/local/lib/pkgconfig:/opt/mystuff/liv/pkgconfig

By default, we are compiling OpenSC with @-Wall -Wextra -Wno-unused-parameter -Werror@, which causes all compiler warnings to be treated as errors. Use @./configure --disable-strict@ to disable this behavior.