h2. Build Requirements

 * Microsoft's "Cryptographic Provider Development Kit":http://download.microsoft.com/download/2/C/9/2C93059C-0532-42DF-8C24-9AEAFF00768E/cngsdk.msi or using the new CPDK "Cryptographic Provider Development Kit":https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=30688
 * "WiX Toolset":http://wixtoolset.org/
 * "OpenSSL":https://www.openssl.org/ (optional)
 * "OpenPACE":https://frankmorgner.github.io/openpace/ (optional)
 * "zlib":https://zlib.net/ (optional)

h4. Getting OpenSSL

Prebuilt OpenSSL libraries are available "here":https://slproweb.com/products/Win32OpenSSL.html. Download and install the 32 bit or 64 bit package for your target platform. OpenSSL can then be found on @C:\OpenSSL-Win32@ or @C:\OpenSSL-Win64@ respectively.

h4. Getting OpenPACE

Download and unpack the source code of the "latest release of OpenPACE":https://github.com/frankmorgner/openpace/releases/latest. Open a Visual Studio _Developer Command Prompt_ and change to the OpenPACE's @src@ directory. Compile the library:
<pre><code>set OPENSSL=C:\OpenSSL-Win64 &REM Change the directory to C:\OpenSSL-Win32 when compiling for 32 bit
cl /I%OPENSSL%\include /I. /DX509DIR=\"/\" /DCVCDIR=\"/\" /W3 /D_CRT_SECURE_NO_DEPRECATE /DWIN32_LEAN_AND_MEAN /GS /MT /c ca_lib.c cv_cert.c cvc_lookup.c x509_lookup.c eac_asn1.c eac.c eac_ca.c eac_dh.c eac_ecdh.c eac_kdf.c eac_lib.c eac_print.c eac_util.c misc.c pace.c pace_lib.c pace_mappings.c ri.c ri_lib.c ta.c ta_lib.c objects.c
lib /out:libeac.lib ca_lib.obj cv_cert.obj cvc_lookup.obj x509_lookup.obj eac_asn1.obj eac.obj eac_ca.obj eac_dh.obj eac_ecdh.obj eac_kdf.obj eac_lib.obj eac_print.obj eac_util.obj misc.obj pace.obj pace_lib.obj pace_mappings.obj ri.obj ri_lib.obj ta.obj ta_lib.obj objects.obj</code></pre>

h4. Getting zlib

Download and unpack the source code of the latest release of zlib. Open a Visual Studio _Developer Command Prompt_ and change to the zlib directory.

Compile the library for 32 bit:
<pre><code>nmake -f win32/Makefile.msc LOC="-DASMV -DASMINF" OBJA="inffas32.obj match686.obj" zlib.lib
</code></pre>
Compile the library for 64 bit:
<pre><code>nmake -f win32/Makefile.msc AS=ml64 LOC="-DASMV -DASMINF -I." OBJA="inffasx64.obj gvmat64.obj inffas8664.obj" zlib.lib</code></pre>

h2. Build Configuration

h3. Edit @Make.rules.mak@

Change @win32/Make.rules.mak@ according to your desired build configuration. Specifically, you may want to change
 * @WIX@ for WiX Toolset
 * @OPENSSL_DEF@ for OpenSSL
 * @OPENPACE_DEF@ and @OPENPACE_DIR@ for OpenPACE
 * @ZLIBSTATIC_DEF@, @ZLIB_LIB@ and @ZLIB_INCL_DIR@ for zlib

h3. Creation of Built Source Files

h4. Creating Built Source Files Using Autoconf

Use "Cygwin":https://cygwin.com/install.html or "MSYS2":http://www.msys2.org/ to install
 * autoconf
 * automake
 * libtool
 * make
 * gcc or mingw-w64 (will not be used for build)
 * pkg-config

Open a Cygwin/MSYS2 terminal or console and change to the OpenSC directory (the previously installed tools need to be found in the @%PATH%@). Create the built source files:

<pre><code>autoreconf -i
./configure --disable-openssl --disable-readline --disable-zlib
make -C etc opensc.conf
cp win32/winconfig.h config.h</pre></code>

h4. Manually Creating Built Source Files

<pre><code>copy src\minidriver\versioninfo-minidriver.rc.in src\minidriver\versioninfo-minidriver.rc
copy src\pkcs11\versioninfo-pkcs11.rc.in src\pkcs11\versioninfo-pkcs11.rc
copy src\pkcs11\versioninfo-pkcs11-spy.rc.in src\pkcs11\versioninfo-pkcs11-spy.rc
copy src\tools\versioninfo-tools.rc.in src\tools\versioninfo-tools.rc
copy win32\OpenSC.wxs.in win32\OpenSC.wxs
copy win32\versioninfo-customactions.rc.in win32\versioninfo-customactions.rc
copy win32\versioninfo.rc.in win32\versioninfo.rc
copy win32\winconfig.h.in win32\winconfig.h</pre></code>

The resulting files still contain strings that are encapsulated in @@@. You need to replace these place holders with meaningful values.

h2. Build OpenSC

Open a Visual Studio _Developer Command Prompt_ and change to the OpenSC directory. Build the OpenSC binaries and installer:

<pre><code>nmake /f Makefile.mak
cd win32
nmake /f Makefile.mak OpenSC.msi</code></pre>

h1. CPDK

When the new CPDK is used, you shall update the Include path:

<pre><code>--- a/win32/Make.rules.mak
+++ b/win32/Make.rules.mak
@@ -131,7 +131,7 @@ CANDLEFLAGS = -dOpenPACE="$(OPENPACE_DIR)" $(CANDLEFLAGS)


 # Used for MiniDriver
-CNGSDK_INCL_DIR = "/IC:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft CNG Development Kit\Include"
+CNGSDK_INCL_DIR = "/IC:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Cryptographic Provider Development Kit\Include"
 !IF "$(PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE)" == "x86" && "$(PROCESSOR_ARCHITEW6432)" == ""
 CNGSDK_INCL_DIR = "/IC:\Program Files\Microsoft CNG Development Kit\Include"
 !ENDIF</code></pre>