h1. Debugging OpenSC and reporting bugs

If "<b>FrequentlyAskedQuestions</b>":wiki/Frequently-Asked-Questions did not solve your problem, you need to either dig into it yourself or send a useful request to the "mailing list":wiki/Mailing-lists. Here are some steps that can help you locate the problem or at least give a lot of detailed information to developers.

h2. Debugging reader issues
<pre><code>opensc-tool -l
</code></pre>

will give you a list of readers opensc has found. If your reader isn't listed, you have
a problem with that reader. For OpenCT see "http://www.opensc-project.org/openct/wiki/TroubleShooting":http://www.opensc-project.org/openct/wiki/TroubleShooting for details.
For PCSC/Lite see it's documentation (FIXME: a link would be nice). For CT-API readers, edit the
opensc.conf and make sure the reader is properly configured. If it still doesn't help, increase
debugging to level 5 or higher in opensc.conf, run "opensc-tool -l" again and send a debug log
to the mailing list (see ContactInfo for details).

FIXME: more help for debugging opensc.

h2. Unsupported INS byte in APDU

This is a common error message. The best translation is:
<pre><code>Sorry, we don't know that card.
</code></pre>

Each card is identified by it so called ATR ("Answer to reset").
You can get this identification code by running
<pre><code>opensc-tool --atr
</code></pre>

OpenSC contains a compiled in list of atr it knows in each card driver.
To check if any card driver knows about your card, please run
<pre><code>opensc-tool --name
</code></pre>

So if that name is "Default driver for unknown cards" then either your card
is not supported at all, or it is a brand new version of an old and supported
card, and if it is compatible with the older version it might work.

In case it is only a new version, but still compatible, you can edit opensc.conf
and configure some driver to also accept this new atr. opensc.conf already contains
a configuration example, you only need to change the atr and driver and enable it.
Here is that example code:
<pre><code>        # GPK card driver additional ATR entry:
        card_driver gpk {
                atr = 00:11:22;
        }

</code></pre>

Replace "gpk" with the card driver of your card and "00:11:22" with the atr
printed by "opensc-tool --atr". WARNING: this can damage your card and render
it useless (in case the driver is not compatible with your card). So don't do
this, unless you are absolutely sure of what you are doing. If you are not
sure, please contact the OpenSC Team (see MailingLists for details).

Also note: more and more drivers have internal flags, for example for subtypes
of cards or for certain properties, like whether or nor a card can generate
keys (very old smartcards can't do that). Currently it is not possible to set
those flags in the config file, so often it might be necessary to edit OpenSC
source code and recompile OpenSC.

If you have a card with some new format, and you are not sure whether some
emulation layer in OpenSC supports it, you can try this command and send us
the output:
<pre><code>opensc-tool -f
</code></pre>

It will read all directories, files, permissions and file content, i.e.
all public content on the card, thus we can have a look, maybe it is something
we already know.
