h1. Donation of free Hardware

Some vendors offer free hardware to OpenSC developers.

"http://www.gooze.eu":http://www.gooze.eu shop offers :
 * 20 Feitian PKI cards for Free Software development (probably more).
 * 20 or more smart card reader : Cherry ST-1044U or Omikey Cardman 3121 USB.

To request free hardware: 
 * Free Feitian PKI:
   "http://www.gooze.eu/products/feitian-pki-free-software-developer-card":http://www.gooze.eu/products/feitian-pki-free-software-developer-card
 * Free ePass2003:
   "http://www.gooze.eu/feitian-epass-2003-free-software-developer-kit":http://www.gooze.eu/feitian-epass-2003-free-software-developer-kit

GOOZE also offers free PINPADs to people interested in extending PINPAD support.

Additional hardware is very welcome. For donations please contact opensc-devel or
any of the developers directly.

h1. Developer Hardware

We can only test what we have. And we can only write drivers for documented smart cards.

Andreas Jellinghaus:
 * SCR 332 USB smart card reader
 * Serial+PS and Serial towitoko readers
 * SPR 532 USB/Serial+PS2 smart card reader
 * Rainbow ikey 3000
 * Aladdin eToken PRO (the old, not the new PRO 64 or PRO NT-OTP)
 * Schlumberger/Axalto Cryptoflex 32k + egate
 * Gemplus PK (one card, I guess 16 Kb)
 * Cryptoflex 16Kb
 * Cryptoflex 8Kb (too small for recent profiles - not tested)

Martin Paljak:
 * SCM SPR 532
 * OmniKey CardMan 3821
 * OmniKey CardMan 1021
 * SCM SCR3500
 * Eutron SimPocket Combo
 * Sitekom MD-010 (SIM)
 * Micardo 2.1 (EstEID 1.0)
 * EstonianEid 1.0, 1.1, 3.0
 * Cyberflex 32K + egate
 * Cryptoflex 32K
 * Oberthur Cosmo v7
 * ACOS5
 * Oberthur Cosmo + AuthentIC applet
 * GemSafe Xpresso32
 * Cyberflex Access v2 64K
 * Epass3000
 * [[Feitian PKI card|Feitian-PKI-card]]
 * [[Siemens-CardOS-M4|Siemens-CardOS-M4]] 4.3
 * [[Aktiv-Co.-Rutoken-ECP|Aktiv-Co.-Rutoken-ECP]] - standard and DS version
 * [[OpenPGP-card|OpenPGP-card]] 1.1/2.0 (CryptoStick)
 * Windows XP SP3 32bit/7 64bit, OS X 10.6.5, GNU/Linux (Ubuntu 10.10) 64bit

Peter Koch:
 * SCM SPR 532
 * OmniKey CardMan 3120, 3121
 * Kobil Professional, Standard, Kaan Advanced, TriBank
 * Cherry GmbH SmartTerminal ST-2xxx, SmartBoard XX44
 * Dell Smart Card Reader Keyboard
 * NetKey E4 card, NetKey E4 V3 card
 * student card Univiersity of Giessen, University of Darmstadt
 * OpenPGP card v1.0, v2.0
 * SignTrust card (TCOS-based, StarCos-based)
 * D-Trust cards
 * Alladin eToken (classic, PRO, PRO64)
 * Cryptoflex 32K
 * German HPC, EGK
 * ACOS5 card
 * RuToken

Viktor Tarasov:
 * SCM SCR 3310
 * OmniKey CardMan 3821
 * Omnikey CardMan 3121
 * Gemalto PC PinPad
 * Oberthur Cosmo, IdOne cards with applet 'AuthentIC'
 * CardOS 4.3b
 * SetCOS 4.4.1b
 * Feitian PKI card
 * Aventra MyEID JCOP21-72k
 * Athena ASEPCOS card
 * Rainbow ikey 3000 
 * GPK 8k
 * Cryptoflex 16k
 * Cryptoflex 32K e-gate


