h1. Getting started with OpenSC

First you need to [[obtain and install|Compiling-and-Installing-OpenSC-on-Unix-flavors]] OpenSC software. If the card you want to use is listed as a read-only card in the [[<b>SupportedHardware</b>|Supported-hardware-(smart-cards-and-USB-tokens)]] list then you can skip the [wiki:CardPersonalization CardPersonalization] with pkcs15-init.

Eventually you will want to use your smart card with various applications. See <b>[[ApplicationSupport|Using-smart-cards-with-applications]]</b> for an incomplete list of supported applications.

<b>SecurityConsiderations</b> must be taken into account when using OpenSC.

If you get stuck with OpenSC and don't find the answer from [[<b>FrequentlyAskedQuestions</b>|Frequently-Asked-Questions]], ask for help on [[opensc-user mailing list|Mailing-lists]]. If you think you have found a bug then please [/newticket report it] but remember - bug tracker is not a support forum. Use the mailing list if you are not sure.

h2. Starting Points

 * OverView - A short introduction what OpenSC is and how it fits into the big picture.
 * "Download":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases the latest stable release of OpenSC.
 * [[QuickStart|Quick-Start-with-OpenSC]] - installation and basic steps to initialize a blank smart card.
 * [[Using OpenSC|Using-OpenSC]] - options when using OpenSC.
 * [[PKCS#15 Initialization|Card-personalization]] Guide with many small details
 * PinpadReaders - are special because there was no standard for pinpads for a long time.
 * ReplacingCertificates - does not work for all cards and is a bit tricky.
 * TroubleShooting explains the most common problems and how to solve them.
