OpenSC provides a set of libraries and utilities to work with smart cards. Its main focus is on cards that support cryptographic operations, and facilitate their use in security applications such as authentication, mail encryption and digital signatures. OpenSC implements the standard APIs to smart cards, e.g. "PKCS#11 API":https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/pkcs11/, "Windows' Smart Card Minidriver":https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/dn631754%28v=vs.85%29.aspx and macOS Tokend.

h2. Download

"OpenSC 0.18.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.18.0 is the latest stable version released on 16.05.2018. It is available as
 * Windows installer
  ** for "64 bit 'OpenSC-0.18.0-win64_vs12-Release.msi'":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.18.0/OpenSC-0.18.0-win64_vs12-Release.msi and
  ** for "32 bit 'OpenSC-0.18.0-win32_vs12-Release.msi'":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.18.0/OpenSC-0.18.0-win32_vs12-Release.msi programs
 * "macOS installer 'OpenSC-0.18.0.dmg'":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.18.0/OpenSC-0.18.0.dmg
 * "Source code distribution 'opensc-0.18.0.tar.gz'":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.18.0/opensc-0.18.0.tar.gz

h4. Nightly build

The latest source code is available through "GitHub":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/archive/master.zip. Nightly builds are available by their git hash in branches of "OpenSC/Nightly":https://github.com/OpenSC/Nightly.

h2. News

 * 16.05.2018: "OpenSC 0.18.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.18.0 is available.
 * 03.02.2018: "Smart Cards in Linux and why you should care":https://archive.fosdem.org/2018/schedule/event/smartcards_in_linux/attachments/slides/2265/export/events/attachments/smartcards_in_linux/slides/2265/smart_cards_slides.pdf: Talk at "FOSDEM 2018":https://archive.fosdem.org/2018/schedule/speaker/jakub_jelen/
 * 18.07.2017: "OpenSC 0.17.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.17.0 is available.
 * 03.06.2016: "OpenSC 0.16.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.16.0 is available.
 * 03.09.2015: "Continious integration for Windows":https://ci.appveyor.com/project/LudovicRousseau/OpenSC/branch/master with AppVeyor
 * 16.05.2015: "OpenSC 0.15.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.15.0/ is available.
 * 01.04.2015: "Continious integration for macOS":https://travis-ci.org/OpenSC/OpenSC/branches with Travis CI
 * 24.01.2015: "Static code analysis":https://scan.coverity.com/projects/opensc-opensc with Coverity Scan
 * 21.01.2015: "Continious integration for Linux":https://travis-ci.org/OpenSC/OpenSC/branches with Travis CI
 * 30.06.2014: "OpenSC 0.14.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.14.0/ is available.
 * 04.12.2012: "OpenSC 0.13.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.13.0/ is available.
 * 05.02.2011: OpenSC was at [[FOSDEM 2012|OpenSC-@-FOSDEM-2012]].
 * 14.07.2011: "OpenSC 0.12.2":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.12.2/ is available.
 * 09.06.2011: "eID interoperability through open source software":http://www.slideshare.net/martinpaljak/opensc-eid-interoperability-through-open-source-software-8255721: Talk at "eID Management Conference":http://www.revolution1.plus.com/eema/index.htm
 * 18.04.2011: OpenSC 0.12.1 is available.
 * 14.04.2011: Nightly builds are available for Windows and Mac OS X users.
 * 05.02.2011: OpenSC was at [[FOSDEM 2011|OpenSC-@-FOSDEM-2011]].
 * 17.12.2010: <b>SECURITY</b>: ("CVE-2010-4523":http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId=CVE-2010-4523) A rogue smart card, specially crafted for this purpose, can be used to potentially execute arbitrary code if inserted to a local machine. See [[SecurityAdvisories|OpenSC-security-advisories]].

See [[History of the OpenSC Project]] for older information.

h2. Sub-projects

OpenSC effort consists of various sub-projects that can be used independently as well, without OpenSC:
 * [[libp11|https://github.com/OpenSC/libp11]] is a wrapper library for PKCS#11 modules which includes an OpenSSL engine for using PKCS#11 tokens
 * [[pkcs11-helper|https://github.com/OpenSC/pkcs11-helper]] Library that simplifies the interaction with PKCS#11 providers for end-user applications using a simple API and optional OpenSSL engine
 * [[PAM-PKCS#11|https://github.com/OpenSC/pam_pkcs11/wiki]] is a feature rich plugable authentication module (PAM) for authentication via PKCS#11 modules, which includes various tools to controls the login process
 * [[pam_p11|https://github.com/OpenSC/pam_p11]] is a simple plugable authentication module (PAM) for authentication via PKCS#11 modules
 * [[OpenCT|https://github.com/OpenSC/openct/wiki]] implements a reader driver interface for various non-standard readers on Linux
 * [[OpenSC-Java|https://github.com/CardContact/opensc-java]] is a Java PKCS#11 wrapper and JCE Provider

h2. Developer Information

 * [[Overview]]
 * [[Smart Card Simulation]]
 * [[Getting involved in OpenSC development]]
 * [[Compiling on Windows]]
 * [[Adding a new card driver]]
 * [[Creating applications with smart card support]]
 * [[Environment variables]]

h2. License

OpenSC is written by an international team of volunteers and is licensed as "Open Source":http://www.opensource.org/ software under the  "LGPL license":http://www.opensource.org/licenses/lgpl-license.php version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. For a list of all authors and contributors as well as detailed license information see [[OpenSC-Credits|OpenSC-Credits]].
