h1. Mailing lists

 * <b>"opensc-devel":http://www.opensc-project.org/mailman/listinfo/opensc-devel</b> ("archive":http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-devel/) ("Gmane":http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.encryption.opensc.devel)- discussion of developement of OpenSC and related projects.
 * "opensc-annouce":http://www.opensc-project.org/mailman/listinfo/opensc-announce ("archive":http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-announce/) ("Gmane":http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.encryption.opensc.announce) - announcements of new releases, bugfixes and security warnings. Low volume.
 * "opensc-commits":http://www.opensc-project.org/mailman/listinfo/opensc-commits ("archive":http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-commits/) - commit notifications for all projects hosted at opensc-project.org. For developers.

To subscribe, unsubscribe or browse the archives, please visit our "mailing list manager":http://www.opensc-project.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo.

<b>NB! You need to be subscribed before posting to any of the above lists! </b>

Please:
 * Do not send carbon copies to the developers. We read all postings on the mailing list.
 * Do not mail developers directly, we read all the mailing lists and the bugs address.
 * Read about <b>ReportingBugs</b> before sending your e-mail.

Read why "privately asking developers":http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/faqs/questions.html is no good.

If you are subscribed to the mailing list, your posting will be distributed
immediately. If you are not subscribed, it will be put on hold, till someone has
reviewed it. This is an emergency procedure only, subscription is assumed.

h2. Bug reports

Please file bug reports using the [/newticket new ticket] link (after reading about ReportingBugs)

Alternatively you can send (sensitive or security related) bug reports to [mailto:bugs@opensc-project.org bugs@opensc-project.org] via email.

h2. Greylisting

The opensc-project.org and lists.opensc-project.org mail servers are protected from spam by using a mechanism
called greylisting. Usualy this only causes a short delay for the first mail we receive from
you, and no trouble at all. Still if for whatever reason you cannot send mail to opensc-project.org,
please contact Andreas Jellinghaus at aj@dungeon.inka.de. Thanks.

h2. Old lists

 *  (<b>deprecated</b>) opensc-user ("archive":http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-user/) ("Gmane":http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.encryption.opensc.user) - discussion of end-user questions for OpenSC and related projects. 
