OpenSC provides a set of libraries and utilities to work with smart cards. Its main focus is on cards that support cryptographic operations, and facilitate their use in security applications such as authentication, mail encryption and digital signatures. OpenSC implements the standard APIs to smart cards, e.g. "PKCS#11 API":https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/pkcs11/, "Windows' Smart Card Minidriver":https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/dn631754%28v=vs.85%29.aspx and macOS Tokend.

h4. Quick Start
 * [[Windows Quick Start]]
 * [[macOS Quick Start]]
 * [[Compiling and Installing on Unix flavors]]

h2. Download

The latest stable version is "OpenSC 0.17.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.17.0 released on 18.07.2016. It is available as
 * "Source code distribution":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.17.0/opensc-0.17.0.tar.gz
 * Windows Installer for "64 bit":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.17.0/OpenSC-0.17.0-win32_vs12-Release.msi and "32 bit":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.17.0/OpenSC-0.17.0-win64_vs12-Release.msi operating system
 * "macOS installer":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/download/0.17.0/OpenSC-0.17.0.dmg

h4. Old Releases

 * "OpenSC 0.16.0":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/releases/tag/0.16.0 released on 04.06.2016
 * "OpenSC 0.15.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.15.0/ released on 16.04.2015
 * "OpenSC 0.14.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.14.0/ released on 26.06.2014
 * "OpenSC 0.13.0":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.13.0/ released on 04.12.2012
 * "OpenSC 0.12.2":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/opensc-0.12.2/ released on 12.06.2013

h4. Nightly build

The latest source code is available through "GitHub":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/archive/master.zip. Nightly builds for Windows are available as build artifact on "AppVeyor":https://ci.appveyor.com/project/LudovicRousseau/opensc/branch/master. Pick one of the builds and select _Artifacts_ to download the MSI.

h2. News

 * 18.07.2017: <b>OpenSC 0.17.0</b> is available.
 * 03.06.2016: <b>OpenSC 0.16.0</b> is available.
 * 16.05.2015: <b>OpenSC 0.15.0</b> is available.
 * 30.06.2014: <b>OpenSC 0.14.0</b> is available.
 * 04.12.2012: <b>OpenSC 0.13.0</b> is available. [[DownloadRelease|Download-latest-OpenSC-stable-release]]
 * 14.07.2011: <b>OpenSC 0.12.2</b> is available. [[DownloadRelease|Download-latest-OpenSC-stable-release]]
 * 09.06.2011: "a talk":http://www.slideshare.net/martinpaljak/opensc-eid-interoperability-through-open-source-software-8255721 covering OpenSC, open source and eID in Europe on EEMA "eID Management Conference":http://www.revolution1.plus.com/eema/index.htm
 * 18.04.2011: OpenSC 0.12.1 is available. [[DownloadRelease|Download-latest-OpenSC-stable-release]]
 * 14.04.2011: [[<b>NightlyBuilds</b>|Automated-OpenSC-builds]] are available for Windows and Mac OS X users.
 * 05.02.2011: OpenSC was at [[FOSDEM 2011|OpenSC-@-FOSDEM-2011]].
 * 17.12.2010 <b>SECURITY</b>: ("CVE-2010-4523":http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId=CVE-2010-4523) A rogue smart card, specially crafted for this purpose, can be used to potentially execute arbitrary code if inserted to a local machine. See [[SecurityAdvisories|OpenSC-security-advisories]].

h2. Sub-projects

OpenSC effort consists of various sub-projects that can be used independently as well, without OpenSC:
 * [[engine_pkcs11|https://github.com/OpenSC/engine_pkcs11/wiki]] is an OpenSSL engine to use PKCS#11 providers, either from command line or from applications
 * "libp11":https://github.com/OpenSC/libp11/wiki is a small C wrapper library for working with PKCS#11 modules.
 * [[pkcs11-helper|pkcs11-helper]] eases working with PKCS#11 modules, by implementing common tasks.
 * "PAM-PKCS#11":https://github.com/OpenSC/pam_pkcs11/wiki implements various authentication methods
 * [[pam_p11|pam_p11-simple-RSA-authentication-with-PKCS#11-modules]] is a small and simple PAM module for local authentication
 * [[OpenCT|https://github.com/OpenSC/openct/wiki]] implements a reader driver interface for various non-standard readers on Linux, meant to be used with OpenSC.
 * [[OpenSC-Java|Using-smart-cards-with-Java-SE]] is a Java<-->OpenSC bridge?

h2. Developer Information

 * [[Overview]]
 * [[Getting involved in OpenSC development]]
 * [[Adding a new card driver]]
 * [[Creating applications with smart card support]]
 * [[Environment variables]]

h2. License

OpenSC is written by an international team of volunteers and is licensed as "Open Source":http://www.opensource.org/ software under the  "LGPL license":http://www.opensource.org/licenses/lgpl-license.php version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. For a list of all authors and contributors as well as detailed license information see [[OpenSC-Credits|OpenSC-Credits]].

h2. Quick Links

 * "Mailing lists":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/wiki/OpenSC-Services#mailing-lists
 * "Download":https://sourceforge.net/projects/opensc/files/OpenSC/
 * [[Application Support|Using-smart-cards-with-applications]] - list of applications with smart card support
 * [[OpenSC Services|OpenSC-Services]]