h1. pkcs11-helper

"PKCS#11":http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-11 is a published standard. PKCS#11 is the de-facto standard to access cryptographic devices.

pkcs11-helper is a library that simplifies the interaction with PKCS#11
providers for end-user applications using a simple API and optional OpenSSL engine.

h2. Sources

"Here":https://github.com/alonbl/pkcs11-helper

h2. Download

"Files":https://github.com/alonbl/pkcs11-helper/downloads

h3. Gentoo

"dev-libs/pkcs11-helper":http://packages.gentoo.org/package/dev-libs/pkcs11-helper

h3. Debian

Contributed by S. Wefel.
"libpkcs11-helper1":http://packages.debian.org/lenny/libpkcs11-helper1

h2. License

"COPYING":https://github.com/alonbl/pkcs11-helper/blob/master/COPYING

h2. Features

pkcs11-helper allows using multiple PKCS#11 providers at the same time, enumerating
available token certificates, or selecting a certificate directly by serialized id,
handling card removal and card insert events, handling card re-insert to a different
slot, supporting session expiration and much more all using a simple API.

pkcs11-helper is not designed to manage card content, since object attributes
are usually vendor specific, and 99% of application need to access
existing objects in order to perform signature and decryption.

h2. Compatibility

 * The pkcs11-helper library is available in POSIX and WIN32 compliant systems.

 * The pkcs11-helper library should work with almost any PKCS#11 provider, since it
   uses the minimum required features of the PKCS#11 standard, a list of WorkingProviders
   is available.

h2. API Documentation

"Here":http://www.opensc-project.org/files/pkcs11-helper/doc/api/.

h2. Projects

 * "OpenVPN":http://www.openvpn.net
 * "OpenSSH PKCS#11 patch":http://alon.barlev.googlepages.com/openssh-pkcs11
 * "GnuPG PKCS#11 smartcard daemon":http://gnupg-pkcs11.sourceforge.net
 * "Qt Cryptographic Architecture PKCS#11 plugin":http://delta.affinix.com/qca
 * "Linux Disk Encryption Integration":http://en.gentoo-wiki.com/wiki/Linux_Disk_Encryption_Using_LoopAES_And_SmartCards
 * "GnuTLS PKCS#11":http://alon.barlev.googlepages.com/gnutls-pkcs11
 * "PKCS#11 Key Module for eCryptfs":http://ecryptfs.sourceforge.net
 * "PolarSSL":http://polarssl.org

h2. Authors

Alon Bar-Lev <[mailto:alon.barlev@gmail.com alon.barlev@gmail.com]>

h2. Thanks

"THANKS":https://github.com/alonbl/pkcs11-helper/blob/master/THANKS

