h1. Resources, Links

h2. Standard Documents

Smart cards are defined in ISO 7816 standards. You need to buy those from ISO,
but "some pages":http://www.ttfn.net/techno/smartcards/standards.html or "this one":http://www.cardwerk.com/smartcards/smartcard_standard_ISO7816.aspx
have overviews on what is in those standards. There is a "PDF preview (90 pages)":http://webstore.iec.ch/preview/info_isoiec7816-4%7Bed2.0%7Den.pdf available from IEC.ch Webstore.

"PC/SC Workgroup":http://www.pcscworkgroup.com/
defines the PC/SC standard that is used on windows, but
thanks to PC/SC-Lite software also on Linux, Mac OS X and BSD. 
You can "download":http://www.pcscworkgroup.com/specifications/overview.php
all parts of the specification.

The Multifunctional Card Terminal specification suite includes CT-API and
it's co-specification CT-BCS. The whole suite is available for download
in "english":http://www.teletrust.de/publikat.asp?id=41220&Sprache=E_&HomePG=0
and "german":http://www.teletrust.de/publikat.asp?ID=41220,0&HomePG=0&sw=1&Sprache=D_.

Public Key Cryptography was partialy defined by the RSA Labs in the PKCS series.
Important standards are:
 * "PKCS #15":http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-15/index.html: Cryptographic Token Information Format Standard
 * "PKCS #11":http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-11/index.html: Cryptographic Token Interface Standard
 * "PKCS #7":http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/pkcs/pkcs-7/index.html: Cryptographic Message Syntax Standard

Personal Identification Cards it an upcoming standard in the USA. NIST has a 
"document":http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips201/FIPS-201-022505.pdf with details.

"IAS ECC":http://www.gixel.fr/includes/cms/_contenus/bibliotheque/file/CAP%20/IAS%20ECC%20v1_0_1UK.pdf (<i>Identification Authentication Signature for European Citizen Card</i>) is the standard for the europeen identity card promoted by french administration.


h2. Software

"OpenCT":http://www.opensc-project.org/openct/ implements drivers for
several smart card readers. OpenSC can use OpenCT directly without the
need for an additional middleware, and this combination is preferred by
some authors and tested all the time, works perfectly.

The "M.U.S.C.L.E.":http://www.linuxnet.com/ project offers
the open source software "PC/SC-Lite":http://pcsclite.alioth.debian.org/ and links to many drivers
in ifdhandler format, and also to some applications.

Some drivers in CT-API format are available for download at
"Gregor's CT-API-Page":http://www.panstruga.de/ct-api/.


