h1. Smart card readers (Linux and Mac OS X)

OpenSC targets smart cards, not smart card readers. So to use your smart card, you need a working smart card reader first. 

OpenSC is supposed to work with any supported smart card (see [[SupportedHardware|Supported-hardware-(smart-cards-and-USB-tokens)]] for a list) if you have a driver for your card reader or USB token. If you're unsure, you need a PC/SC driver, which 99.9% of vendors provide for at least Windows platform. CT-API drivers are also supported (only if required and a driver is available from reader vendor, CT-API is a deprecated interface) and OpenCT (on Linux/BSD, if the reader or token does not work with pcsc-lite).

h2. USB

Most common connector type for smart card readers is USB.

h3. CCID

Almost all recent USB smart card readers follow the "CCID":http://www.usb.org/developers/devclass_docs/DWG_Smart-Card_CCID_Rev110.pdf specification. But not all. For USB dongles, a driver is *needed* for the USB connection if the token uses a proprietary protocol. 
For a list of CCID smart card readers supported by the "http://pcsclite.alioth.debian.org/section.html.":http://pcsclite.alioth.debian.org/section.html. If you are planning to buy a smart card reader, be sure to check for CCID compliance (and "extended APDU support":http://pcsclite.alioth.debian.org/ccid_extended_apdu.html#explanation if you want to be somewhat future-proof)

Some readers claim "CCID compatible" in marketing material but are not compliant (don't work with operating system provided CCID drivers) in real life. Readers known to do this are:
 * ACS ACR83
 * ACS APG8201

h3. USB tokens (PC/SC)

 * Schlumberger/Axalto e-gate pcsc-lite driver: see [[Using-Schlumberger-e-gate-on-Linux|Using-Schlumberger-e-gate-on-Linux]]

h3. USB tokens (OpenCT)

 * FIXME List of tokens supported by OpenCT

h2. PIN pad readers

 * Notes about CT-API and PinpadReaders

h2. Bluetooth readers

If someone has experience with any of these, please comment.
 * "https://ftsafe.com/products/reader/Bluetooth":https://ftsafe.com/products/reader/Bluetooth SDK available at Github("bR301(Bluetooth 3.0)":https://github.com/FeitianSmartcardReader/bR301_SDK_Latest/ and "bR301BLE(Bluetooth 4.2":https://github.com/FeitianSmartcardReader/BR500_AND_BR301BLE_SDK_Latest/) , including for Android, iOS and Windows, "Specification Detail":https://ftsafe.com/products/reader/bluetooth/specification)
 * "http://www.apriva.com/products/iss/authentication/reader":http://www.apriva.com/products/iss/authentication/reader (SDK available under NDA/license, including for Android)
 * "http://www.blackberry.com/solutions/pdfs/SmartCardReaderBrochure.pdf":http://www.blackberry.com/solutions/pdfs/SmartCardReaderBrochure.pdf
 * "http://www.biometricassociates.com/products-baimobile/bluetooth-smart-card-reader.html":http://www.biometricassociates.com/products-baimobile/bluetooth-smart-card-reader.html ?
 * "http://www.hidglobal.com/prod_detail.php?prod_id=369":http://www.hidglobal.com/prod_detail.php?prod_id=369 (Windows-only PC/SC driver, proprietary/NDA low level protocol)
 * "http://images.telos.com/files/external/BT200_Slick.pdf":http://images.telos.com/files/external/BT200_Slick.pdf (not reachable)

Information on using existing PC/SC reader over bluetooth on Android: "http://code.google.com/p/seek-for-android/wiki/BTPCSC":http://code.google.com/p/seek-for-android/wiki/BTPCSC
