h1. STARCOS  cards 

STARCOS is a card operating system family from "Giesecke & Devrient":http://www.gi-de.com/en/products_and_solutions/products/strong_authentication/product_details_5824.jsp

h2. Version 2.3

Version 2.3 is supported by OpenSC.to be precise: iKey 3000 which contains Starcos).
The StarKey 100 (USB) token from G&D  doesn't seem to work. It features Starcos SPK 2.3, but adding
usb:096e/0005 to the ikey3k driver ids in openct.conf still won't access the card.

Currently only Starcos SPK 2.3 is tested. If you have a newer version, please report back.

h2. Version 3.0

Version 3.0 is not supported by the OpenSC Starcos driver yet. Support is required to make [[German eGK/eHBA|German-eHBA,-eGK]] work.
An experimental driver was posted on opensc-devel:  
"http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-devel/2010-March/013759.html":http://www.opensc-project.org/pipermail/opensc-devel/2010-March/013759.html
but is not available in the current release and needs porting.

h2. Version 3.1

There also seems to be Version 3.1 which only does ECC signatures instead of RSA. This is not yet supported by OpenSC as well.

G&D is a very nice company, their APDU manuals are public available, all you need to do
is send an email asking for them, and they send you the latest version. This is great!
Thanks G&D!

h2. Version 3.2

This OS version is used in the current (2010) signature cards (Card 3.2, MCard 3.2, MCard100 3.2) offered by SignTrust. It appears to support RSA up to 2048b key length. See "the BSI certification":https://www.bsi-fuer-buerger.de/cae/servlet/contentblob/485364/publicationFile/29254/02114_pdf.pdf of these cards.

h2. Version 3.4

Initial support for German D-Trust cards is available from the patch in "pull request #357":https://github.com/OpenSC/OpenSC/pull/357.

h2. Version 3.5

Version 3.5, used as of 2017, e.g. by DGN, is not supported at this time.

h1. Erasing cards

Only test cards with StarCOS are erasable. If the last byte of the return
value of "opensc-tool -s 80:f6:00:01" is 0x00 the card is afaik not
erasable, if it's 0xc0 it should be erasble. 

Eutron CryptoIdendity ITSEC-P tokens contain normal cards and thus are not eraseable.
[[BackLinks]]

