h1. Support for InterWiki links

<i>(since [trac:milestone:0.10 0.10])</i>

h2. Definition

An InterWiki link can be used for referring to a Wiki page
located in another Wiki system, and by extension, to any object
located in any other Web application, provided a simple URL 
mapping can be done.

At the extreme, InterWiki prefixes can even be used to simply introduce
links to new protocols, such as `tsvn:` used by [trac:TortoiseSvn TortoiseSvn].

h2. Link Syntax

<pre><code><target_wiki>(:<identifier>)+
</code></pre>

The link is composed by the targeted Wiki (or system) name,
followed by a colon (e.g. `MeatBall:`),
followed by a page specification in the target.
Note that, as for InterTrac prefixes, <b>InterWiki prefixes are case insensitive</b>.

The target Wiki URL is looked up in the InterMapTxt wiki page, 
modelled after MeatBall:InterMapTxt.

In addition to traditional InterWiki links, where the target
is simply <i>appended</i> to the URL, 
Trac supports parametric InterWiki URLs:
identifiers `$1`, `$2`, ... in the URL
will be replaced by corresponding arguments.
The argument list is formed by splitting the page identifier
using the ":" separator.

h2. Examples

If the following is an excerpt of the InterMapTxt page:

<pre><code>= InterMapTxt =
== This is the place for defining InterWiki prefixes ==

Currently active prefixes: [[InterWiki]]

This page is modelled after the MeatBall:InterMapTxt page.
In addition, an optional comment is allowed after the mapping.
----
{{{
PEP      http://www.python.org/peps/pep-$1.html           # Python Enhancement Proposal $1 
Trac-ML  http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.subversion.trac.general/$1  # Message $1 in Trac Mailing List

tsvn     tsvn:                                            # Interact with TortoiseSvn
...
MeatBall http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?
MetaWiki http://sunir.org/apps/meta.pl?
MetaWikiPedia http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/
MoinMoin http://moinmoin.wikiwikiweb.de/
...
</code></pre>
}}}

Then, 
 * `MoinMoin:InterWikiMap` should be rendered as MoinMoin:InterWikiMap
   and the <i>title</i> for that link would be "!InterWikiMap in MoinMoin"
 * `Trac-ML:4346` should be rendered as Trac-ML:4346
   and the <i>title</i> for that link would be "Message 4346 in Trac Mailing List"

----
See also: InterTrac, InterMapTxt
