h1. The Trac Wiki Engine

[[TracGuideToc]]

Trac has a built-in wiki engine, used for text and documentation throughout the system. WikiFormatting is used in [[wiki pages|TitleIndex]], [wiki:TracTickets tickets], [wiki:TracChangeset check-in log messages], [wiki:TracRoadmap milestone] and [wiki:TracReports report] descriptions.  It allows for formatted text and hyperlinks in and between all Trac modules.

Editing wiki text is easy, using any web browser and a simple [WikiFormatting formatting system], rather than more complex markup languages like HTML.  The reasoning behind its design is that HTML, with its large collection of nestable tags, is too complicated to allow fast-paced editing, and distracts from the actual content of the pages. Note though that Trac also supports [WikiHtml HTML], [WikiRestructuredText reStructuredText] and "Textile":http://www.textism.com/tools/textile/ as alternative markup formats.

The main goal of the wiki is to make editing text easier and <i>encourage</i> people to contribute and annotate text content for a project. Trac also provides a simple toolbar to make formatting text even easier, and supports the "universal edit button":http://universaleditbutton.org/Universal_Edit_Button of your browser.

The wiki itself does not enforce any structure, but rather resembles a stack of empty sheets of paper, where you can organize information and documentation as you see fit, and later reorganize if necessary. 
As contributing to a wiki is essentially building an hypertext, 
general advice regarding HTML authoring apply here as well.
For example, the <i>"Style Guide for online hypertext":http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style</i> explains how to think about the
"overall structure of a work":http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/Structure.html 
and how to organize information "within each document":http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/WithinDocument.html. One of the most important tip is “make your HTML page such that you can read it even if you don't follow any links.”

Learn more about:
 * WikiNewPage creation, which can be configured to start from a [PageTemplates page template]
 * WikiFormatting rules, including advanced topics like WikiMacros and WikiProcessors
 * How to use WikiPageNames and other forms of TracLinks which are used to refer in a precise way to any resource within Trac

If you want to practice editing, please use the SandBox.

Before saving your changes, you can <i>Preview</i> the page or <i>Review the Changes</i> you've made.
You can get an automatic preview of the formatting as you type when you activate the <i>Edit Side-by-side</i> mode. <i> There is a [[configurable delay|/TracIni#trac-section]] between when you make your edit and when the automatic preview will update.</i>

Some more information about wikis on the web:
 * A definition of "Wiki":http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki, in a famous  wiki encyclopedia
 * The "History":http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WikiHistory of the original wiki
 * A wiki page explaining "why wiki works":http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?WhyWikiWorks

----
See also: TracGuide

