h1. The Trac Roadmap

[[TracGuideToc]]

The roadmap provides a view on the "ticket system":wiki/The-Trac-Ticket-System that helps planning and managing the future development of a project.

h2. The Roadmap View

Basically, the roadmap is just a list of future milestones. You can add a description to milestones (using WikiFormatting) describing main objectives, for example. In addition, tickets targeted for a milestone are aggregated, and the ratio between active and resolved tickets is displayed as a milestone progress bar.  It is possible to further [trac:TracRoadmapCustomGroups customise the ticket grouping] and have multiple ticket statuses shown on the progress bar.

The roadmap can be filtered to show or hide <i>completed milestones</i> and <i>milestones with no due date</i>. In the case that both <i>show completed milestones</i> and <i>hide milestones with no due date</i> are selected, <i>completed</i> milestones with no due date __will__ be shown.

h2. The Milestone View

You can add a description for each milestone (using WikiFormatting) describing main objectives, for example. In addition, tickets targeted for a milestone are aggregated, and the ratio between active and resolved tickets is displayed as a milestone progress bar.  It is possible to further [trac:TracRoadmapCustomGroups customise the ticket grouping] and have multiple ticket statuses shown on the progress bar.

It is possible to drill down into this simple statistic by viewing the individual milestone pages. By default, the active/resolved ratio will be grouped and displayed by component. You can also regroup the status by other criteria, such as ticket owner or severity. Ticket numbers are linked to "custom queries":wiki/Trac-Ticket-Queries listing corresponding tickets.

h2. Roadmap Administration

With appropriate permissions it is possible to add, modify and remove milestones using either the web interface (roadmap and milestone pages), web administration interface or by using `trac-admin`. 

<b>Note:</b> Milestone descriptions can not currently be edited using 'trac-admin'.

h2. iCalendar Support

The Roadmap supports the "iCalendar":http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2445.txt format to keep track of planned milestones and related tickets from your favorite calendar software. Many calendar applications support the iCalendar specification including
 * "Apple iCal":http://www.apple.com/ical/ for Mac OS X
 * the cross-platform "Mozilla Calendar":http://www.mozilla.org/projects/calendar/
 * "Chandler":http://chandlerproject.org
 * "Korganizer":http://kontact.kde.org/korganizer/ (the calendar application of the "KDE":http://www.kde.org/ project)
 * "Evolution":http://www.novell.com/de-de/products/desktop/features/evolution.html also support iCalendar
 * "Microsoft Outlook":http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/outlook/ can also read iCalendar files (it appears as a new static calendar in Outlook)

To subscribe to the roadmap, copy the iCalendar link from the roadmap (found at the bottom of the page) and choose the "Subscribe to remote calendar" action (or similar) of your calendar application, and insert the URL just copied.

<b>Note:</b> For tickets to be included in the calendar as tasks, you need to be logged in when copying the link. You will only see tickets assigned to yourself, and associated with a milestone.

More information about iCalendar can be found at "Wikipedia":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICalendar.
----
See also: TracTickets, TracReports, TracQuery, [trac:TracRoadmapCustomGroups TracRoadmapCustomGroups]

