h1. The Trac Timeline

[[TracGuideToc]]

The timeline provides a historic view of the project in a single report.

It lists all Trac events that have occurred in chronological order, a
brief description of each event and if applicable, the person responsible for
the change.

The timeline lists these kinds of events:
 * <b>Wiki page events</b> — Creation and changes
 * <b>Ticket events</b> — Creation and resolution/closing (and optionally other changes)
 * <b>Source code changes </b> — Repository check-ins
 * <b>Milestone </b> — Milestone completed

Each event entry provides a hyperlink to the specific event in question, who authored the change as well as
a brief excerpt of the actual comment or text, if available.

It is possible to filter the displayed events with the various filters in the option panel:
 * <i>View changes from</i> — the date from which to start displaying events (current date if empty). Events that occurred after this date will not be shown, only those that occurred before that date.
 * <i>and X days back</i> — how many days backwards in time to get events.
 * <i>done by</i> — the author of an event. It accepts a space-separated list of authors for which events should be included. Alternatively, if the author names are prefixed by a "-" character, then the events having those authors will be excluded, and all the others included. Single or double quotes can be used for specifying author names containing space characters. <i>(since 0.12)</i>
 * <i>Changesets in all repositories</i> — if you have more than one repository connected to your Trac project, then you can filter the output so events from specific repositories are not shown. <i>(since 0.12)</i>
 * <i>Milestones reached</i> — display or hide milestones reached.
 * <i>Opened and closed tickets</i> — display or hide ticket open or close events.
 * <i>Wiki changes</i> — display or hide Wiki change events.

See TracIni's "Not found: text("[timeline) link(TracIni#timeline-section)":wiki/TracIni#timeline-section section"] for timeline configuration options.

h2. RSS Support

The Timeline module supports subscription using RSS 2.0 syndication. To subscribe to project events, click the orange <b>XML</b> icon at the bottom of the page. See TracRss for more information on RSS support in Trac.

----
See also: TracGuide, TracIni, TracWiki, WikiFormatting, TracRss, TracNotification

