h1. Unicode Support in Trac

[[TracGuideToc]]

Trac stores all text using UTF-8 encoding, including text in tickets and wiki pages. Internal processing of text uses true Unicode representations.

As such, it supports most (all?) commonly used character encodings.

If your encoding is not UTF-8, you can use "mod_python":wiki/Trac-and-mod_python to handle it.  For example, if your local encoding is gbk, you can set 
   default_charset = gbk
in trac.ini.

You also must make sure that your [trac:DatabaseBackend database backend] stores its data in UTF-8; otherwise strange things will happen.

To convert your database to UTF-8, the easiest way is to dump the database, convert the dump into UTF-8 and then import the converted dump back into the database.<br />
You can use "iconv":http://www.gnu.org/software/libiconv/documentation/libiconv/iconv.1.html to convert the dump.


h2. Examples

h3. Arabic

تراك يقوم بحفظ كل الكلمات باستخدام صيغة UTF-8، بما في ذلك الكلمات المستخدمة في صفحات  التيكت والويكي.

h3. Bulgarian
Българският език работи ли?

h3. Česky

Čeština v kódování UTF-8, žádný problém.

h3. Chinese

Traditional: 繁體中文, 漢字測試; Simplified: 简体中文，汉字测试

h3. Croatian

Ako podržava srpski i slovenski mora podržavati i Hrvatski - čćžšđ ČĆŽŠĐ 

h3. English

Yes indeed, Trac supports English. Fully.

h3. Français

Il est possible d'écrire en Français : à, ç, û, ...

h3. German

Trac-Wiki muß auch deutsche Umlaute richtig anzeigen: ö, ä, ü, Ä, Ö, Ü; und das scharfe ß

h3. Greek
Τα Ελληνικά υποστηρίζονται επαρκώς επίσης.

h3. Hebrew
אני יכול לאכול זכוכית וזה לא מזיק לי

h3. Hindi
अब हिन्दी में।

h3. Hungarian

Árvíztűrő tükörfúrógép

h3. Icelandic

Ævar sagði við ömmu sína: Sjáðu hvað ég er stór!

h3. Japanese
漢字 ひらがな カタカナ ﾊﾝｶｸｶﾅ 日本語試験

h3. Korean
이번에는 한글로 써보겠습니다. 잘 보이나요? 한글

h3. Latvian

Latviešu valoda arī strādā!

h3. Lithuanian

Sudalyvaukime ir mes. Ar veikia lietuviškos raidės? ąčęėįšųūž ĄČĘĖĮŠŲŪŽ Žinoma, kad veikia :)
Kas tie mes?

h3. Persian (Farsi)

این یک متن فارسی است ولی امکان نوشتن مستقیم فارسی نیست چون حالت متن از راست به چپ و جود ندارد برای فارسی نوشتن باید از HTML استفاده کنید.
<pre><code>#!html
<div dir="rtl">
</code></pre>
این نمونه یک متن از راست به چپ فارسی است که در HTML نوشته شده تا اعداد 12345 و حروف لاتین ABCDEF در محل خودشان نمایش داده شوند.
<pre><code>#!html
</div>
</code></pre>

h3. Polish

Pchnąć w tę łódź jeża lub osiem skrzyń fig; Nocna gżegżółka zawsze dzienną przekuka.

h3. Portuguese

É possível guardar caracteres especias da língua portuguesa, incluindo o símbolo da moeda européia '€', trema 'ü', crase 'à', agudos 'áéíóú', circunflexos 'âêô', til 'ãõ', cedilha 'ç', ordinais 'ªº', grau '°¹²³'.

h3. Russian
Проверка русского языка: кажется работает... И буква "ё" есть...

h3. Serbian

Podržan, uprkos činjenici da se za njegovo pisanje koriste чак два алфабета.

h3. Slovenian

Ta suhi škafec pušča vodo že od nekdaj!

h3. Spanish

Esto es un pequeño texto en Español, donde el veloz murciélago hindú comía cardlllo y kiwi

h3. Swedish

Räven raskar över isen med luva på.

h3. Thai

Trac แสดงภาษาไทยได้อย่างถูกต้อง!

h3. Ukrainian
Перевірка української мови...

h3. Urdu
ٹریک اردو بھی سپورٹ کرتا ہے۔

h3. Vietnamese

Viết tiếng Việt cũng được.

