h1. Viewing Revision Logs

[[TracGuideToc]]

When you browse the repository, it's always possible to query the 
<i>Revision Log</i> view corresponding to the path you're currently seeing.
This will display a list of the most recent changesets in which the 
current path or any other path below it has been modified.

h2. The Revision Log Form

It's possible to set the revision at which the revision log should
start, using the <i>View log starting at</i> field. An empty value
or a value of <i>head</i> is taken to be the newest changeset. 

It's also possible to specify the revision at which the log should
stop, using the <i>back to</i> field. By default, it's left empty, 
which means the revision log will stop as soon as 100 revisions have 
been listed.

Also, there are three modes of operation of the revision log.

By default, the revision log <i>stops on copy</i>, which means that 
whenever an <i>Add</i>, <i>Copy</i> or <i>Rename</i> operation is detected, 
no older revision will be shown. That's very convenient when working
with branches, as one only sees the history corresponding to what
has been done on the branch.

It's also possible to indicate that one wants to see what happened
before a <i>Copy</i> or <i>Rename</i> change, by selecting the 
<i>Follow copies</i> mode. This will cross all copies or renames changes.
Each time the name of the path changes, there will be an additional
indentation level. That way, the changes on the different paths
are easily grouped together visually.

It's even possible to go past an <i>Add</i> change, in order to see 
if there has been a <i>Delete</i> change on that path, before 
that <i>Add</i>. This mode corresponds to the mode called 
<i>Show only adds, moves and deletes</i>. 
While quite useful at times, be aware that this operation is quite 
resource intensive.

Finally, there's also a checkbox <i>Show full log messages</i>,
which controls whether the full content of the commit log message
should be displayed for each change, or only a shortened version of it.

h2. The Revision Log Information

For each revision log entry, there are 7 columns:
 1. The first column contains a pair of radio buttons and should be used 
    for selecting the <i>old</i> and the <i>new</i> revisions that will be 
    used for [[viewing the actual changes|TracRevisionLog#viewingtheactualchanges]].
 1. A color code (similar to the one used for the
    [[changesets|TracChangeset#ChangesetHeader]]) indicating kind of change.
    Clicking on this column refreshes the revision log so that it restarts
    with this change.
 1. The <b>Revision</b> number, displayed as `@xyz`.
    This is a link to the TracBrowser, using the displayed revision as the base line.
 1. The <b>Changeset</b> number, displayed as `[xyz]`.
    This is a link to the TracChangeset view.
 1. The <b>Date</b> at which the change was made.
    The date is displayed as the time elapsed from the date of the revision. The time
    elapsed is displayed as the number of hours, days, weeks, months, or years.
 1. The <b>Author</b> of the change.
 1. The <b>Log Message</b>, which contains either the truncated or full commit 
    log message, depending on the value of the <i>Show full log messages</i> 
    checkbox in the form above.
    

h2. Inspecting Changes Between Revisions

The <i>View changes...</i> buttons (placed above and below the list
of changes, on the left side) will show the set of differences
corresponding to the aggregated changes starting from the <i>old</i>
revision (first radio-button) to the <i>new</i> revision (second
radio-button), in the TracChangeset view.

Note that the <i>old</i> revision doesn't need to be actually 
<i>older</i> than the <i>new</i> revision: it simply gives a base
for the diff. It's therefore entirely possible to easily 
generate a <i>reverse diff</i>, for reverting what has been done
in the given range of revisions.

Finally, if the two revisions are identical, the corresponding
changeset will be shown (same effect as clicking on the ChangeSet number).

h2. Alternative Formats

h3. The ChangeLog Text

At the bottom of the page, there's a <i>!ChangeLog</i> link
that will show the range of revisions as currently shown,
but as a simple text, matching the usual conventions for
!ChangeLog files.

h3. RSS Support

The revision log also provides a RSS feed to monitor the changes.
To subscribe to a RSS feed for a file or directory, open its
revision log in the browser and click the orange 'XML' icon at the bottom
of the page. For more information on RSS support in Trac, see TracRss.

----
See also: TracBrowser, TracChangeset, TracGuide
